Abstract
Context-Aware Recommender Systems (CARS) have started to attract significant research attention in the last years, due to the interest of considering the context of the user in order to offer him/her more appropriate recommendations. However, the evaluation of CARS is a challenge, due to the scarce availability of appropriate datasets that incorporate context information related to the ratings provided by the users.
In this paper, we present DataGenCARS, a complete Java-based synthetic dataset generator that can be used to obtain the required datasets for any type of scenario desired, allowing a high flexibility in the obtention of appropriate data that can be used to evaluate CARS. The generator presents features such as: a flexible definition of user schemas, user profiles, types of items, and types of contexts; a realistic generation of ratings and attributes of items; the possibility to mix real and synthetic datasets; functionalities to analyze existing datasets as a basis for synthetic data generation; and support for the automatic mapping between item schemas and Java classes. Moreover, an experimental evaluation illustrates the interest and the benefits provided by DataGenCARS.
Introduction
During the last years, research in Recommender Systems (RS) has started to focus on the so-called Context-Aware Recommender Systems (CARS), in which the context of the recommendation plays an essential role in the process. An important number of works have achieved significant progress in this direction in recent times  [1]. Moreover, there are also attempts to bridge the gap between the fields of mobile computing and recommendation systems  [2]. Evaluating and comparing recommendation approaches is a key issue  [3], [4], but traditional well-known datasets are not suitable for the evaluation of CARS, due to several reasons: (i) they do not usually incorporate contextual information that can be exploited; (ii) they are usually oriented to very specific domains such as movies, music, or travel-related ratings and reviews; (iii) collecting new datasets is very costly in terms of the resources required (many mobile users actively using mobile applications to rate items in a wide area would be needed) and can usually lead to privacy problems, especially when trying to extract the contextual information; and (iv) they are static, i.e., they capture data during a fixed period of time and under certain circumstances, but one cannot assume that the collected data will be representative enough for fully testing recommendation algorithms in any sort of scenario.
There exist some datasets incorporating contextual information to test algorithms for CARS (e.g., STS  [5], [6]). However, they are usually incomplete, since most users prefer not to disclose their context when they rate items, or they may just be lazy to do so. Moreover, these datasets do not cover all the possible potential scenarios that researchers would need to prove the validity and generality of their recommendation approaches. Therefore, it would be very interesting to have a tool that supports the generation of synthetic datasets that could be used to evaluate recommendation algorithms.
Motivated by the reasons indicated above, in this paper, we present a Java-based synthetic data generator for CARS (DataGenCARS) that allows flexible configurations to set up any type of realistic recommendation scenario (with or without contextual information) to test the suitability of algorithms for CARS. Our approach allows generating coherent data about users, items and contexts, as a basis for the evaluation of recommendation approaches.
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. Section  2 presents the main functionalities and the architecture of the generator. In Section  3, we illustrate the use of DataGenCARS to perform some interesting tasks that can be useful to generate data for the evaluation of recommendation algorithms. In Section  4, a complete set of experiments is conducted. Then, we analyze existing related work in Section  5. Finally, Section  6 summarizes the paper and sketches some lines of future work.
Access through your organization

Check access to the full text by signing in through your organization.
Section snippets
Basics of DataGenCARS
In this section, we first describe the functionality of DataGenCARS. Then, we overview the main classes in its architecture. The input files and the output data files it produces are described in Appendix A. Fig. 1 describes the general functionality of the dataset generator. Note that the tool may need different phases depending on the purpose of the dataset to be generated, namely: (i) create a new dataset from the scratch; (ii) create a new dataset replicating the features of an existing
DataGenCARS in action
In this section, we illustrate some capabilities of DataGenCARS by exploring typical tasks that can be performed by using it. Before entering into technical details, Fig. 9 provides some usage guidelines that facilitate understanding the functionality of DataGenCARS at a glance. When a researcher faces the problem of finding a way to evaluate a recommendation algorithm, he/she also needs to tackle the issue of finding out which data can be used to carry out such evaluation. The easiest way for
Experimental evaluation
In this section, we describe the experimental evaluation that we have performed to show the usefulness of DataGenCARS. We present two sets of experiments. On the one hand, the goal of the experiments presented in Section  4.1 is to show the usefulness of generating a completely-synthetic dataset to evaluate recommendation algorithms. On the other hand, the experiments shown in Section  4.2 focus on the capabilities of DataGenCARS that support the generation of realistic datasets. In both cases,
Related work
There exist in the literature different approaches to build synthetic datasets. Most of them are aimed at providing collections of data for fields in which it is rare to find complete datasets, such as image recognition  [26] or very large databases  [27]. We can also find some generic and commercial approaches in which datasets can be generated using a web application, program, or downloadable framework that provides an API. An overview of some popular tools can be seen in Table 2, Table 3. A
Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we have presented DataGenCARS, a tool for the automatic generation of datasets that is appropriate for the evaluation of context-aware recommendation algorithms. The tool is very generic and can fit different application domains and sets of needs, by appropriately defining a set of input data files that will direct its behavior. With the tool, we can simulate any desired situation as well as reproduce or mimic any existing one (e.g., generate new datasets with features similar to
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the CICYT project TIN2013-46238-C4-4-R and DGA-FSE. We thank Professor Andrej Kos˘ir (University of Ljubljana) for kindly providing us a copy of the LDOS-CoMoDa dataset. Last but not least, we thank the reviewers and the editors for their insightful and useful comments.
